Update dictionary-expressions.md (#8595)
dotnet/csharplang: proposals/dictionary-expressions.md

> Several dictionary-like types can created without external BCL support.  These types are:

Author: whitespace off to help with the review.

> 1. Concrete dictionary-like types, containing an indexer `TValue this[TKey] { get; }`, like `Dictionary<TKey, TValue>`, `ConcurrentDictionary<TKey, TValue>`, `ImmutableDictionary<TKey, TValue>`, and `FrozenDictionary<TKey, TValue>`.

Author: i realized this was wrong.  ID and FD shouldn't be in this list.  They should be in the list we need runtime 'create method' support for.

1. The well-known generic BCL dictionary interface types: `IDictionary<TKey, TValue>` and `IReadOnlyDictionary<TKey, TValue>`.

> Further support is present for dictionary-like types not covered above through the `CollectionBuilderAttribute` and a similar API pattern to the corresponding *create method* pattern introduced for collection expressions.  For example `ImmutableDictionary<TKey, TValue>` and `FrozenDictionary<TKey, TValue>`.

Author: ```suggestion
Further support is present for dictionary-like types not covered above through the `CollectionBuilderAttribute` and a similar API pattern to the corresponding *create method* pattern introduced for collection expressions.  Types like `ImmutableDictionary<TKey, TValue>` and `FrozenDictionary<TKey, TValue>` will be updated to support this pattern.
```

## Design Intuition

There are three core aspects to the design of dictionary expressions. 

> 1. Collection expressions containing `KeyValuePair<,>` (coming from `expression_element`, `spread_element`, or `key_value_pair_element` elements) can now instantiate a normal *collection type* *or* a *dictionary type*.

Author: moved to a form where we give an intuition, and then examples of it.

    So, if the target type for a collection expression is some *collection type* (that is *not* a *dictionary type*) with an element of `KeyValuePair<,>` then it can be instantiated like so:

    ```c#
    List<KeyValuePair<string, int>> nameToAge = ["mads": 21];
    ```

    This is just a simple augmentation on top of the existing collection expression rules.  In the above example, the code will be emitted as:

    ```c#
    __result.Add(new KeyValuePair<string, int>("mads", 21));
    ```

> 2. Introduction of the *dictionary type*. *Dictionary types* are types that are similar to the existing *collection types*, with the additional requirements that they have an *element type* of some `KeyValuePair<TKey, TValue>` *and* have an indexer `TValue this[TKey] { ... }`. The former requirement ensures that `List<T>` is not considered a dictionary type, with its `int`-to-`T` indexer. The latter requirement ensures that `List<KeyValuePair<int, string>>` is not considered a dictionary type, with its `int`-to-`KeyValuePair<int, string>` indexer. `Dictionary<TKey, TValue>` passes both requirements.

Author: ```suggestion
2. Introduction of the *dictionary type*. *Dictionary types* are types that are similar to the existing *collection types*, with the additional requirements that they have an *element type* of some `KeyValuePair<TKey, TValue>` *and* have an indexer `TValue this[TKey] { ... }`. The former requirement ensures that `List<T>` is not considered a dictionary type, as its element type is `T` not `KeyValuePair<,>`. The latter requirement ensures that `List<KeyValuePair<int, string>>` is also not considered a dictionary type, with its `int`-to-`KeyValuePair<int, string>` indexer (instead of an `int`-to-`string` indexer). `Dictionary<TKey, TValue>` passes both requirements.
```

### Answered question 2
    As such, if the target type for the collection expression *is* a *dictionary* type, then all `KeyValuePair<,>` produced by `expression_element` or `spread_element` elements will be changed to use the indexer to assign into the resultant dictionary. Any `key_value_pair_element` will use that indexer directly as well.  For example:

Can you spread a *non dictionary type* when producing a dictionary type'd value.  For example:
    ```c#
    Dictionary<string, int> nameToAge = ["mads": 21, existingDict.MaxPair(), .. otherDict];

```c#
Dictionary<string, int> nameToAge = ["mads": 21, .. existingListOfKVPS];
``` 

**Resolution:** *Spread elements* of key-value pair collections will be supported in dictionary expressions. [LDM-2024-03-11](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/meetings/2024/LDM-2024-03-11.md#conclusions)

> ### Answered question 3

Author: Answered questions moved to the end.

> 3. Alignment of the rules for assigning to *dictionary types* with the rules for assigning to *collection types*, just requiring aspects such as *element* and *iteration types* to be some `KeyValuePair<,>`.  *However*, with the rules extended such that that `KeyValuePair<,>` type itself is relatively transparent, and instead the rule is updated to work on the underlying `TKey` and `TValue` types.

Author: added this new intuition.  Specifically that while `KVP<>` is the element type, we want to operate more on the level of Keys/Values.   I give an example below this of why that is desirable.

>   * There is an identity conversion from the indexer return type to `TValue`.\*

Author: @cston  if this word is needed.  If the spec already talks about `indexer types` in other places, then we can revert.  I liked `return type` to make it clear which type this was referring to.

Reviewer: `TValue` is only the return type from the getter, so I'd suggest leaving as "type" rather than "return type".

Author: done.

>   * There is an identity conversion from the indexer return type to `TValue`.\*

Author: ```suggestion
  * There is an identity conversion from the indexer type to `TValue`.\*
```

## Design Intuition

There are three core aspects to the design of dictionary expressions. 

1. Collection expressions containing `KeyValuePair<,>` (coming from `expression_element`, `spread_element`, or `key_value_pair_element` elements) can now instantiate a normal *collection type* *or* a *dictionary type*.

    So, if the target type for a collection expression is some *collection type* (that is *not* a *dictionary type*) with an element of `KeyValuePair<,>` then it can be instantiated like so:

    ```c#
    List<KeyValuePair<string, int>> nameToAge = ["mads": 21];
    ```

    This is just a simple augmentation on top of the existing collection expression rules.  In the above example, the code will be emitted as:

    ```c#
    __result.Add(new KeyValuePair<string, int>("mads", 21));
    ```

> 2. Introduction of the *dictionary type*. *Dictionary types* are types that are similar to the existing *collection types*, with the additional requirements that they have an *element type* of some `KeyValuePair<TKey, TValue>` *and* have an indexer `TValue this[TKey] { ... }`. The former requirement ensures that `List<T>` is not considered a dictionary type, with its `int`-to-`T` indexer. The latter requirement ensures that `List<KeyValuePair<int, string>>` is not considered a dictionary type, with its `int`-to-`KeyValuePair<int, string>` indexer. `Dictionary<TKey, TValue>` passes both requirements.

Reviewer: For `List<T>`, if it's the former requirement, should the reason be the following?

> The former requirement ensures that `List<T>` is not considered a dictionary type, since the *element type* is `T`.

Author: yup!

### Question: Specialized comparer syntax.

Should there be more distinctive syntax for the comparer?  Simply starting with a comparer could be difficult to tease out.  Having a syntax like so could make things clearer:

```c#
// `comparer: ...` to indicate the purpose of this value
Dictionary<string, int> caseInsensitiveMap = [comparer: StringComparer.CaseInsensitive, .. existingMap];

> // Semicolon to more clearly dilineate the comparer

Reviewer: Typo: "delineate"

### Question: Specialized comparer syntax.

Should there be more distinctive syntax for the comparer?  Simply starting with a comparer could be difficult to tease out.  Having a syntax like so could make things clearer:

```c#
// `comparer: ...` to indicate the purpose of this value
Dictionary<string, int> caseInsensitiveMap = [comparer: StringComparer.CaseInsensitive, .. existingMap];

> // Semicolon to more clearly dilineate the comparer

Author: ```suggestion
// Semicolon to more clearly delineate the comparer
```

> Dictionary<string, int> caseInsensitiveMap = [StringComparer.CaseInsensitive; .. existingMap];

Author: based on suggestion from mads

// Both?
Dictionary<string, int> caseInsensitiveMap = [comparer : StringComparer.CaseInsensitive; .. existingMap];
```

### Question: Types of comparers supported.

`IEqualityComparer<T>` is not the only comparer type used in collections.  `SortedDictionary<,>` and `SortedSet<,>` both use an `IComparer<T>` instead (as they have ordering, not hashing semantics).  It seems unfortunate to leave out `SortedDictionary<,>` if we are supporting the rest.  As such, perhaps the rules should just be that the special value in the collection be typed as some `IComparer<T>` or some `IEqualityComparer<T>`.  

## Conversions

*Collection expression conversions* are updated to include conversions to *dictionary types*.

An implicit *collection expression conversion* exists from a *collection expression* to the following *dictionary types*:
* A *dictionary type* with an appropriate *[create method](#create-methods)*.
* A *struct* or *class* *dictionary type* that implements `System.Collections.IEnumerable` where:
  * The *element type* is determined from a `GetEnumerator` instance method or enumerable interface.

>   * The *type* has an *[applicable](https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/blob/standard-v6/standard/expressions.md#11642-applicable-function-member)* constructor that can be invoked with no arguments (*or* a constructor with a single [*comparer*](Comparer-support) parameter), and the constructor is accessible at the location of the collection expression.

Reviewer: >(Comparer-support) [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=249&length=18)

If these are links to the "Comparer support" section of this document, the link should be <code>(#Comparer-support)</code>.

Author: done.

> > **A create method will commonly use the name `CreateRange` in the dictionary domain.**

Author: ```suggestion
> **A create method need not be called `Create`.  Instead, it may commonly use the name `CreateRange` in the dictionary domain.**
```

>
> For the create method:
>   - The method must have a single parameter of type System.ReadOnlySpan<E>, passed by value, and there is an identity conversion from E to the *iteration type* of the collection type. 

> >    - **The method can be called with two parameters, where one is a [*comparer*](Comparer-support) and the other follows the rules of the *single parameter* rule above. This method will be called if the collection expression's first element is an [*comparer*](Comparer-support) that is convertible to that parameter type.**

Author: note: i changed the wording subtly.  For constructors we just say it needs to be callable (meaning it could have optional arguments).  We can return this to just be exactly two parameters.  We can also be explicit if the comparer has to be the first parameter or not.  

This part is TBD when talking to runtime.  It will come down to if they want exactly one pattern used *everywhere*, or if they have a couple they expect.

Note: ToFrozenDictionary is of the form:

```c#
public static FrozenDictionary<TKey, TValue> ToFrozenDictionary<TKey, TValue>(this IEnumerable<KeyValuePair<TKey, TValue>> source, IEqualityComparer<TKey>? comparer = null)
```

While immutable dictionary looks like:

```
public static ImmutableDictionary<TKey, TValue> CreateRange<TKey, TValue>(IEqualityComparer<TKey>? keyComparer, IEnumerable<KeyValuePair<TKey, TValue>> items)
```

So, if we want to point at existing methods, we'd need to support these forms.  However, if we're mandating `ROS<KVP>`, then we'll need new overloads anyways, and we can have strict rules on the shape.

--

Finally, we may likelyy need new overloads as FrozenDict has overwrite semantics (which we want) while ImmutableDict does not (it throws).  

Tagging in @stephentoub .

> >    - **The method can be called with two parameters, where one is a [*comparer*](#Comparer-support) and the other follows the rules of the *single parameter* rule above. This method will be called if the collection expression's first element is an [*comparer*](#Comparer-support) that is convertible to that parameter type.**

Author: ```suggestion
>    - **The method has two parameters, where the first is a [*comparer*](#Comparer-support) and the other follows the rules of the *single parameter* rule above. This method will be called if the collection expression's first element is an [*comparer*](#Comparer-support) that is convertible to that parameter type.**
```

> This would allow `ImmutableDictionary<TKey, TValue>` to be annotated with `[CollectionBuilder(typeof(ImmutableDictionary), "CreateRange")]` to light up support for creation.

Author: ```suggestion
Dictionary type authors who use `CollectionBuilderAttribute` should have the method that is pointed to have `overwrite` not `throw` semantics when encountering the same `.Key` multiple times in the span of `KeyValuePair<,>` they are processing.
```

The elements of a collection expression are evaluated in order, left to right. Each element is evaluated exactly once, and any further references to the elements refer to the results of this initial evaluation.

If the target is a dictionary type, and collection expression's first element is an `expression_element`, and the type of that element is convertible to some [*comparer*](#Comparer-support), then:

1. If using a constructor to instantiate the value, the constructor must take a single parameter whose type is some [*comparer*](#Comparer-support) type.  The first `element_expression` value will be passed to this parameter.

> 2. If using a `create method`, the method must have a parameter whose type is some [*comparer*](#Comparer-support) as one of its parameters. The first `element_expression` value will be passed to this parameter.

Author: ```suggestion
2. If using a `create method`, the method's first parameter's type is some [*comparer*](#Comparer-support) type. The first `element_expression` value will be passed to this parameter.
```

> 3. If creating an interface, this [*comparer*](Comparer-support) must be some `IEqualityComparer<TKey>` type. That comparer will be used to  control the behavior of the final type (synthesized or otherwise).  This means that instantiating interfaces only supports hashing semantics, not ordered semantics. 

Author: Tagging @stephentoub .  If you guys added an `ISortedDictionary<>` and `IReadOnlySortedDictionary<>` we could key off of those to create sorted versions automatically.  That can also come in the future.

```c#
Dictionary<string, Option> optionMap = [opt1Name: opt1Default, opt2Name: opt2Default, .. userProvidedOptions];
```

Or, conversely:

```c#
Dictionary<string, Option> optionMap = [.. Defaults.CoreOptions, feature1Name: feature1Override];
```

Which approach should we go with with our dictionary expressions? Options include:

1. Purely restrictive.  All elements use `.Add` to be added to the list.  Note: types like `ConcurrentDictionary` would then not work, not without adding support with something like the `CollectionBuilderAttribute`.
2. Purely permissive.  All elements are added using the indexer.  Perhaps with compiler warnings if the exact same key is given the same constant value twice.
3. Perhaps a hybrid model.  `.Add` if only using `k:v` and switching to indexers if using spread elements.  There is deep potential for confusion here.

**Resolution:** Use *indexer* as the lowering form. [LDM-2024-03-11](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/meetings/2024/LDM-2024-03-11.md#conclusions)

## Retracted Designs/Questions

> ### Question: Should `k:v` elements force dictionary semantics?

Author: No one is coming with this recommendation anymore.  And we made a firm LDM stance in the last meeting that `k:v` was fine for normal non-dicttionary types.  So this question is retracted.

When the destination is an IEnumerable, we tend to think we're producing a sequence (so "mads" could show up twice).  However, the use of the `k:v` syntax more strongly indicates production of a dictionary-value.

What should we do here when targeting `IEnumerable<...>` *and* using `k:v` elements? Produce an ordered sequence, with possibly duplicated values?  Or produce an unordered dictionary, with unique keys?

Decision: `IEnumerable<KVP>` is not a dictionary type (as it lacks an indexer).  As such, it has sequential value semantics (and can include duplicates).  This would happen today anyways if someone did `[.. ldm]` and we do not think the presence of a `k:v` element changes how the semantics should work.

This is also similar to how passing to an `IEnumerable<T>` would differ from passing to some *set* type with normal collection expressions.  The target type *intentionally* affects semantics, and there is no expectation that across very different target types that one would receive the same resultant values with the same behaviors.  We do not view *dictionary types* or *key value pair elements* as changing the calculus here.

### Question: Allow deconstructible types?

> Should we take a very restrictive view of `KeyValuePair<,>`?  Specifically, should we allow only that exact type?  Or should we allow any types with an implicit conversion to that type?  For example:

Author: This idea made a lot of people uncomfortable.  And we do not need it at all for a viable and good dictionary story.  So explicitly retracting this from the design.  This can always be revisited later.

```c#
struct Pair<X, Y>
{
  public static implicit operator KeyValuePair<X, Y>(Pair<X, Y> pair) => ...;
}

Dictionary<int, string> map1 = [pair1, pair2]; // ?

List<Pair<int, string>> pairs = ...;
Dictionary<int, string> map2 = [.. pairs]; // ?
```

Similarly, instead of `KeyValuePair<,>` we could allow *any* type deconstructible to two values? For example:

```c#
record struct Pair<X, Y>(X x, Y y);

Dictionary<int, string> map1 = [pair1, pair2]; // ?
```

Resolution: While cute, these capabilities are not needed for core scenarios to work.  They also raise concerns about where to draw the line wrt to what is the dictionary space and what is not.  As such, we will only allow `KeyValuePair<,>` for now.  And we will not do anything with tuples and/or other deconstructible types.  This is also something that could be relaxed in the future if there is sufficient feedback and motivation to warrant it.  This design space is withdrawn from dictionary expressions.

### Question: Semantics when a type implements the *dictionary type* shape in multiple ways.

What are the rules when types have multiple indexers and multiple impls of `IEnumerable<KVP<,>>`?  

> This concern already exists with *collection types*.  For those types, the rule is that we must have an *element type* as per the existing language rules.  This follows for *dictionary types*, along wih the rule that there must be a corresponding indexer for this *element type*.  If those hold, the type can be used a a *dictionary type*.  If these don't hold, it cannot be.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This concern already exists with *collection types*.  For those types, the rule is that we must have an *element type* as per the existing language rules.  This follows for *dictionary types*, along with the rule that there must be a corresponding indexer for this *element type*.  If those hold, the type can be used as a *dictionary type*.  If these don't hold, it cannot be.
```

> This concern already exists with *collection types*.  For those types, the rule is that we must have an *element type* as per the existing language rules.  This follows for *dictionary types*, along wih the rule that there must be a corresponding indexer for this *element type*.  If those hold, the type can be used a a *dictionary type*.  If these don't hold, it cannot be.

Author: Also retracted.  This was solved just fine for normal collection types.  Nothing  needs to change here as far as we can tell.

## Open Questions

### Question: Types that support both collection and dictionary initialization

C# 12 supports collection types where the element type is some `KeyValuePair<,>`, where the type has an applicable `Add()` method that takes a single argument. Which approach should we use for initialization if the type also includes an indexer?

For example, consider a type like so:

```c#
public class Hybrid<TKey, TValue> : IEnumerable<KeyValuePair<TKey, TValue>>
{
    public void Add(KeyValuePair<TKey, TValue> pair);
    public TValue this[TKey key] { ... }
}

// This would compile in C# 12:
// Translating to calls to .Add.
Hybrid<string, int> nameToAge = [someKvp];
```

Options include:

1. Use applicable instance indexer if available; otherwise use C#12 initialization.
2. Use applicable instance indexer if available; otherwise report an error during construction (or conversion?).
3. Use C#12 initialization always.

> Resolution TBD.  Working group recommendation: Use applicable instance indexer only.  This ensures that everything dictionary-like is initialized in a consistent fashion.  This would be a break in behavior when recompiling.  The view is that these types would be rare.  And if they exist, it would be nonsensical for them to behave differently using the indexer versus the .Add (outside of potentially throwing behavior).

Author: this is still a good open question, after 'comparers'.  We should get LDM thoughts on how we want to proceed here.

### Question: Parsing ambiguity

Parsing ambiguity around: `[a ? [b] : c]`

> Working group recommendation: Use normal parsing here.  So this would be the same as `[a ? ([b]) : (c)]` (a collection expression containing a conditional expression).  If the user wants a `key_value_pair_element` here, they can write: `[(a?[b]) : c]`

Author: very low level concern.  Just want to get sign off that the direction the existing impl takes is the desired one.

What are the rules when types have multiple indexers and multiple impls of `IEnumerable<KVP<,>>`

It would likely make sense to align with whatever comes out if you `foreach`ed the collection.

> TODO: Working group recomendation: Look at what happens with existing *collection expressions* and *collection types* with similar cases.  Follow that.  

Reviewer: >Look at what happens with existing *collection expressions* and *collection types* with similar cases. [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=35&length=102)

A collection type with multiple implementations of `IEnumerable<T>` (and with no accessible `GetEnumerator()` method) cannot be used as a collection expression target type.
